[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>RICHARD DOLAN: So
much of our history
is just gone, missing from us.
And so much of our
UFO history is gone.
And even the stuff that's not
gone is just pushed to the side
as if it is gone.
You know, people who
research UFOs, they all
know about the year 1952.
It was a big year.
Even UFO researchers,
I think, sometimes
forget the significance
of that year
and of so many other
events in our history.
But 1952 was really
an amazing year.
It was the year that UFO
sightings just went completely
through the roof.
No one was expecting the
amount and the intensity,
the quality of sightings
both by just ordinary people
and by the military
throughout the entire year.
It got to be so
bad that the US Air
Force had to issue a massive
press conference in July,
at the end of July, to kind
of put all of this to the side
so that people just wouldn't
panic over all of these flying
saucer reports.
Now, the official explanation of
something is always one thing.
But what people talk
about behind the scenes,
well, that's always
something very different.
And this was exactly
the case with UFOs.
So whereas the Air Force is
telling the public, yeah,
this is all pretty
understandable--
we're not worried about it-- you
shouldn't be worried about it,
either--
no big thing here,
nothing to see--
behind the scenes, Air
Force intelligence,
Navy intelligence, CIA--
all of them and others--
are discussing how the
public explanation is not
really credible,
no one believes it,
and what's actually going on.
So within the CIA, there
were quite a few discussions
from August of 1952 right on
through the end of the year.
And it was really an important
conversation that took place.
And it culminated in an
incredible statement,
an unbelievable statement
to the Director of the CIA,
which I'll get to
in just a minute.
But before that,
in August of 1952,
what we know through
the little snippets
and scraps of
declassified documents
that have come to us--
and believe me,
there's so much more
that I'm sure we haven't
gotten access to--
but what we've
learned is that there
are some pretty interesting
discussions going on
within the CIA that summer of
1952 about UFOs that didn't
exactly match the party line.
We'll just put it that way.
So I'm going to read a
little bit of a quote
that we have from one document.
On August 14, the Office
of Scientific Intelligence
created a new study group to
look into this UFO phenomenon
due to a special inquiry from
the White House, the memo said.
So President Harry
Truman, in other words,
asked the CIA to look into these
flying saucers, these UFOs.
And they met.
And this is what we have
in this one memo here.
What we know is that
this whole thing
had to be kept secret
beyond everything else.
The most important
thing was secrecy.
Here's what one part of it says.
"In view of the wide
interest within the agency,
it must be mentioned that
outside knowledge of agency
interest in flying
saucers carries
the risk of making
the problem even more
serious in the public
mind than it already is,
which we and the Air Force
agree, must be avoided."
So before they say anything
about the phenomenon itself,
the point is the
public can't ever
know that we're looking into
this because if the public ever
learns that the CIA is
interested in UFOs, well,
all hell will break loose.
And we must not let that happen.
So that's interesting.
But then this
report actually goes
into a lot of specifics
about the UFO subject.
It goes so far as to
break these reports down
into types of UFOs--
small UFOs, medium sized UFOs
like 100 feet in diameter,
and really super large UFOs,
even much larger than that.
They talk about different
behaviors of the UFOs
from hovering and slow movement
to very, very rapid movement
to just like
unbelievable speeds,
incomprehensible speeds.
All of this is noted within
the CIA's memo of August 1952.
And here's where it gets
even more interesting to me.
It describes three
levels of speed--
hovering, moderate,
and stupendous
was the word that they use.
That is pretty interesting.
They pretty much ruled out
the Russians or the Soviets
as being behind this.
That didn't really
seem plausible to them,
which absolutely, it's not.
But they would not go
down any other road
to try to identify this because
the fact is they just didn't
have anything to come up with.
And here's a very interesting
statement from this memo.
The report, after ruling
out Soviet weapons,
it talks about
"sightings of UFOs
reported at Los
Alamos and Oak Ridge
at a time when the background
radiation count had risen
inexplicably," and goes
on to say, "in this case,"
wrote the report's
author, "we run out
of even blue yonder explanations
that might be tenable.
And we are still left with
numbers of incredible reports
from credible observers.
So here we are in the
middle of August 1952.
And you got the CIA talking
about very credible observers
noticing incredible things,
recording incredible things
that are described
as very physical--
small medium to large,
hovering speed, moderate speed,
stupendous speed-- all of this--
and saying we don't really
have an explanation for this.
Soviets ruled out.
Natural phenomena-- you can
see that they want to go there.
But they also don't have any
shred of science to support it.
And then what you see is once
again the mental gymnastics
come in.
Thou shalt not discuss
extraterrestrials.
And so the memo says, well,
there's not a shred of evidence
to support the
extraterrestrial hypothesis.
OK, well, fine.
But the problem is this
memo shows no reason
to go any other direction.
They leave you
nothing other than
the extraterrestrial hypothesis,
as far as I'm reading it.
Now, 1952 continued onward.
And the CIA kept wondering,
what do we do about these UFOs.
Like, the Harry Truman
Presidency is about to end.
There's going to be a
new President coming in.
And is there any a little
bit of housecleaning
that we need to do before
the new guys come in?
This is very much on their mind.
And aside from the fact
that throughout all of 1952
these UFO sightings were so
fast and furious and so many
that there really was a
concern within the CIA,
not simply of UFOs intrinsically
but of what if there's
so many UFOs that they clog
all the communication channels
and people just calling in
about them all the time.
And you can't get
anything else done.
And what if the Russians
use this as an excuse
to launch an attack when
we're busy being confused
by the UFOs?
Like, this was a
concern of theirs.
It seems to me the only
reason they would be concerned
about this is if they
implicitly recognize
the phenomenon was real.
If they actually believed
it was imaginary,
it's really hard to see that
they would be very concerned
about all of this.
But the phenomenon was real.
It was being taken as real all
throughout the fall and winter
of 1952.
We know this.
The military was still deeply
concerned with these UFOs.
So now we get to
December of 1952.
And the Director of Scientific
Intelligence for the CIA, a man
named H. Marshall
Chadwell, so he
was running all scientific
intel for the CIA at that time.
He writes a memo to his boss,
the Director of the CIA,
a man named Walter Bedell Smith.
And Smith himself was kind
of a legendary person.
During World War
II, Smith had been
the Chief of Staff of
General Dwight Eisenhower
during the D-Day invasions.
Walter Bedell Smith was
a tough guy, smart man.
And in 1952, he was
running the CIA.
And Chadwell in December,
December 2, sends Smith a memo.
It's a secret memo that
is just extraordinary.
It has one of the most
extraordinary paragraphs you
will find in any UFO document.
This is what Chadwell says.
"At this time, the
reports of incidents
convince us that there is
something going on that
must have immediate attention.
Sightings of unexplained
objects at great altitudes
and traveling at high
speeds in the vicinity
of major US defense
installations
are of such nature
that they are not
attributable to natural
phenomena or known
types of aerial vehicles."
Now, that's a dead
stop right there.
You know, keep in
mind that this is
a classified memo,
a bureaucratic memo,
at that, sent to the
Director of the CIA.
And short of Chadwell
saying, boss,
I think we're being
invaded, I don't know what
else he could have said here.
This is a very direct statement.
He's talking about
something that
needs immediate attention, not
due to fears of public panic
or communication systems
being jammed, no,
but because unexplained
objects at incredible altitudes
and incredible speeds
were being seen
near sensitive installations.
That's a serious problem.
And Chadwell just lays
it out for his boss,
the Director of the CIA.
So what are we
dealing with here?
Well, I don't know
how much more explicit
you could expect H. Marshall
Chadwell to have been.
The immediate
aftermath of this memo,
this incredibly
open, candid memo
on the reality of
these UFOs, was
to create what became known
as the Robertson Panel.
The Robertson Panel is
something I've always felt
was the last bit
of housecleaning
of the Harry Truman Presidency.
Happened during the weekend of
January 14 to January 18, 1953.
Just two days after
that ended, we
had a new President,
Dwight Eisenhower.
This was a CIA orchestrated
panel of scientists
who looked into UFO
reports, all really
as a result of what
the CIA was involved
in all at the end
of 1952 in terms
of trying to get this whole
thing together and make
it comprehensible.
And also, really what you
get with the Robertson Panel
is to make it controlled
within the classified world.
The real end result of the
CIA's analysis and investigation
of UFOs in 1952 was real simple.
It was not to solve the problem
because there's no way they're
going to solve it.
It's not to find
out a proper method
for dealing with these
objects because they surely
couldn't do that either.
The only thing they
really could do
is to clamp down on the
secrecy even further.
And that's exactly what
the Robertson Panel did.
Robertson Panel says we're
going to have this debunked
to the public because we
don't want people getting
engaged in this subject.
We're going to monitor
UFO organizations.
We'll put spies in there.
And we'll work with
organizations like Disney
to debunk UFOs to the public.
And basically, we're
just going to put
it to sleep as far as
the public's concerned.
And also, what
they ended up doing
was making it more difficult
within the military
and within the
intelligence world also
for ordinary people
in the military
just to report these UFOs.
So it was a real
clampdown that ensued.
Because here's the thing.
They're obviously in a
position in the 1950s
where these objects were
totally outclassing anything
the United States
or any other nation
could bring to the table.
And so really, what could you do
except deny, debunk, cover up.
[MUSIC PLAYING]